
AWS has many database services catering for relational (SQL) and non-relational (NoSQL) needs.



For a data model whose structure changes frequently, a database should also be dynamic. 

SQL choices are Aurora, Amazon RDS

while the NoSQL options are DynamoDB

For ad hoc queries, a well defined schema, database-driven apps that are developer-optimesed and easy to scale up woth faster hardware, relational databases are the best option.
Primarily used to suppot complex queries that do not require schemas that are more flexible.
The do not scale well because this paradigm normaloises and stores data on multiple tables that require multiple queries to write to disk, thegenerally incur ACID-comlpliant transaction performance costs, and use joins to resemble rquired queries which are computationally expensive.


For web-scale apps that do not require schema, but where each table must have a primary key, that are designed to scale outusing distributed hardware clusters.
NoSQL databases such as DynamoDB can manage structured or semi-structured data. 
The advantage of NoSQL databases are that rows and elements can be easily added or removed from the table entry. It is beneficial for low-latency, high-traffic queries.
NoSQL scales well because of its scema flexibility allowing it to store complex hierachical data within a single item, and related items may be stored close together on the same table via the composite key design

RedShift is also NoSQL and is generally used for OLAP systems.


references:

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/bp-general-nosql-design.html

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/bp-relational-modeling.html

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/SQLtoNoSQL.html







Database endpoints

for services that involve a clister of DB instances (e.g.. Aurora), each connection is handled by a specific DB instance.

The intermediate handler between host name and theport is an *endpoint*

Primary instance handles all DDL (data definitionlanguage), and DML (data manipulation language) statements

endpoints allow you to map each connection to the appropriate instance or instance group in a case based manner

Aurora automatically performs load balancing


Custom Endpoint: creating a custom endpoint can help to modify traffic capacity for different user types.

Reader Endpoints: automatic load balancing, but limited to read operations only

Instance Endpoint: a cluster endpoint (writer endpoint) connects to primary DB instance for that DB cluster and can perform write operations such as DDL statements - this handles production traffic but not queries for reporting

Reference:

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/Aurora.Overview.Endpoints.html










